[MUSIC PLAYING]
Have you ever felt
that your belongings
are running your life?
Well, not surprisingly, that
is one of the greatest stresses
on relationships: our stuff.
It creates conflicts in
all of our relationships.
The questions such as where our
stuff should go, how much of it
we should keep, and
whether or not we
should bring it home at all
haunts millions of people.
Brooks Palmer started out as
an expert in clearing cutter--
clearing clutter,
but soon realized
that he was playing
marriage counselor
when dealing with people
in all of their attachments
to our stuff.
Clearing clutter,
easy for me to say.
One of the reasons I wanted
to talk about you is we
have this recession going
on for quite a long time now
and people are
starting to downsize.
A lot of people are downsizing.
And this is creating a
lot of stress individually
and within relationships,
starting to deal
with what stays and what goes.
And, really, the book
that you've written
has much more to do with
psychology and relationships.
Your other stuff was really
more designed to help people
just deal with the clutter.
This one is really about
how we are psychologically
dealing with clutter.
And I thought I might ask
you right off the bat,
are you need freak?
Or did you have clutter
issues yourself?
Tell us a little bit
about your background.
When I was a kid, my
mom used to yell at me
cause I would leave all
my clothes on the floor.
You know, my MAD magazines
and piece of paper
and-- I didn't care, I just
used the floor as a desk
or a surface, you know?
And she would scream
at me and I would
never do anything about it.
And it didn't change me at all.
I mean, it doesn't make me
change how I live my life.
But when I went to art
school, my professor
talked about how it's important
to have a clean work surface.
That, when you're
not distracted,
you're able to think more
clearly and your ideas flow.
And, so, I found that that
works really well in the work
that I do.
And in my life too, I like
to keep it really simple
so that I enjoy the
things that I love.
Yeah, and that's going to
become a really key part
of the conversation,
is how our lives have
been co-opted by our stuff.
And I know people-- I've
seen this over and over
where-- girlfriends
of mine-- where, they
won't even engage socially.
They won't have people
over to their homes
because they're so
embarrassed about their stuff
flying all over the place.
-Sure
And almost becomes shut-ins,
in a sense or shout-outs.
Who don't want to share their
homes with other people.
Well, I've found-- because
I've been helping people let go
of clutter for about 10
years-- and many people
are very embarrassed
about the clutter
they have in their homes.
And they feel that people
are going to judge them.
And oftentimes, they feel
like they're the only ones
that are living this way.
So it's a shame thing?
Yeah.
And right off the bat I let
them know that they're not.
Because people will say,
like, am I your worst client?
Is this the worst
place you've ever seen?
Like, I'm going to tell
them, yeah you're terrible.
You know, I would never do that.
And, really,
everybody has clutter.
My definition of clutter
is, anything in your life
that's no longer serving you.
So that's-- at one time it was.
Whatever we bring into our
life, we feel like it's going
to help us, whatever that is.
But then things don't help us.
And some things help
us but then they stop.
And it's OK to have clutter.
It's OK to have these
things around our house,
and to recognize,
like, I have clutter.
The whole thing is
I want to encourage
people rather than feel badly
-Right.
And lock their doors.
Even though-- or-- be shut-ins.
REGINA: Shut the
world out, right.
Yeah, to go, like, all right,
everybody's got clutter.
And it makes sense.
I change my needs change.
So some of these
things around me--
I now longer wear that shirt.
I'm done with that book.
I don't listen to
that CD, whatever.
And go through your stuff.
And make kind decisions.
By kind, meaning, like,
not being mean to yourself.
And, that's OK.
And then you go through--
do I want this cup or not?
Do I enjoy drinking from this?
Because you have a relationship
with everything in your life
that's part of your life.
So, is this a good relationship?
You know, oh, I don't drink from
this cup, so I'll let it go.
And that's a very--
it puts you in touch
with your heart for the source.
Yes.
Because you have to really look
at, then, your relationships
with your stuff.
And it really gets into
some-- that's a loaded one.
One friend of mine right
now-- her husband-- the kids
are out of the nest, her
husband wants to move on,
they have a big house,
large piece of property
to maintain-- he's tired of it.
And they have collected so
much stuff in their life
that, like, a move isn't
even up for debate.
Because she doesn't want to
have to deal with having to get
rid of stuff.
So they're immobilized now.
Yeah, and that's
hard on the couple.
It's really hard on the couple.
And oftentimes they'll
take it out on each other,
and I've seen that.
Because clutter does that.
Clutter-- it's like
it possesses us.
It has a very destructive and
a manipulative and exhausting
effect.
So, we start to act as
if we've been drugged.
REGINA: It's like
this albatross.
Yeah, and people, if
they live by themselves,
will take it out on themselves.
Saying they're a pad
person or that they
feel bad about their lives.
Or members of the couple
will bite at each other.
REGINA: You've been in the
middle of a lot of these.
Reading your book,
I mean, you're
standing there with people
tearing each other apart
over their stuff.
Yeah, well I had
this one couple--
they were-- they had little
rabbits, two rabbits,
that ran around on the floor.
And they had concrete
floors, so they
could clean up from the rabbit.
But they were screaming at
each other in their bedroom.
Like, veins popping
out of their neck.
REGINA: [LAUGHING]
That's uncomfortable.
Their faces were red, yeah.
And--
REGINA: And you
were just brought
in to help them clear clutter?
-Yeah, they hired me for that.
-OK.
And I'm kind of soft
spoken, so it was hard for me
to tell them to stop
screaming at each other.
They said they weren't
hearing me, you know.
And one of the rabbits
went under the bed.
So, for some reason,
I thought, all right,
I'll look under the bed.
And I saw that there was a
carpet that the bed was on.
And this carpet was the
source of their argument.
So, it was all about carpet.
She was like, I don't
like the carpet.
And he goes, that
carpet's from my family.
Why don't you ever support me?
And she was like, well,
why don't you think about
me first before the family?
That was all about the carpet.
OK, so, faces are red.
Veins are bulging.
-Yeah.
The carpet was
covered with hundreds
of pieces of rabbit poop.
Those little round pellets.
[LAUGHING] Yeah.
It was just heaps of rabbit
poop all underneath there.
And the carpet itself was
soaked with the rabbit urine.
And they hadn't
even-- here, they're
arguing over this thing.
Well, essentially, it's like the
house is burning down, right?
Here they have the very
precious thing that they're
arguing over has
already been destroyed
and no one's paying attention?
Why didn't they notice this?
BROOKS: Because--
Did they?
Well, no, they
didn't notice it.
I mean, it could've
been accumulation
of living under this carpet
that they both disagreed about.
But also, too, the way
they spoke to each other
was clutter.
Because, deep down, we're
sensitive creatures.
And, so, we think because that
we need to protect ourselves.
And we surround ourselves
with things that we think
will build a protective wall.
But we lose touch
with that sensitivity.
And that couple of
lost touch with that.
So, they couldn't
communicate with each other.
And that's why they
were screaming.
And this whole thing with the
rabbit and the carpet-- well,
basically what I did was, I
told them-- I yield really loud.
And they stopped
screaming and they
checked out underneath the bed,
and they saw what had happened.
REGINA: They must've
been embarrassed.
Yeah, but they were also quiet.
There was this sobering effect.
And I said, you guys can't
talk that we to each other.
It's like stabbing each other.
It's really intense.
And it doesn't serve
the relationship.
And the relationship itself
is a thing as much as the bed
as much as the red, the
rabbits, and the rug.
And sometimes we forget that.
So, it was sobering
because they saw that.
And for the first
time, they connected.
REGINA: They must have realized
how unconscious each of them
are being to allow
this to accumulate
and happen surrounding
the very subject
that they were debating.
-Well, yeah, probably--
-Yeah.
On some level they did.
And we had to spend some
time cutting up the carpet
because they couldn't
do anything about it.
And they started actually
talking to each other.
But, you know, saying
something and being
heard, back and forth.
And I think that was
profound for them.
REGINA: Yeah, and
that's really part of it
is feeling judged,
like you said,
misunderstood,
not heard when you
go into conflict over stuff.
I mean, we'll talk
about some of that.
But there was another man
you wrote about in your book
and it really was a
very tender subject.
He was a tough guy,
really tough guy, and what
you would call a hoarder.
I know you don't like that word.
Why don't you like
that word, number one?
But that's what we would
classically refer to him as.
You can't move
through the house,
there's so much
garbage and stuff.
I don't like the word hoarder.
It's often used during clutter
busting talks and such.
It's a common
phrase that's used.
Generally, people tend
to think of hoarders
as that's what clutter is.
It's like, that's where
people's minds go.
Clutter are the people
who have so much stuff,
they can't walk
down there hallways.
But I don't have clutter, you
know, so I'm not like that.
And also, too, it's often
used as a critical word.
Like, somebody who's overweight,
calling them fat, or something.
It's oh, that hoarder.
If you've seen that
show, Hoarders, you know?
REGINA: Yeah, it is
a very loaded term.
Yeah, and I like to-- those
people in those situations,
they're like that because
they're in a lot of pain.
And they've surrounded
themselves with a lot of things
to try to insulate that pain.
So it's not a conscious choice.
It's done automatically.
And so--
REGINA: Tell us about that
man, that particular guy.
Sure, he was like
Charles Bronson.
Looked like Charles Bronson.
Wore black clothes, you know?
And he had six
locks on his door.
REGINA: Didn't want anyone to
break in and steal his stuff?
Yes, very defensive.
And he had sign on
his door, "Occupants
are home and our armed"--
like, underlined, "armed."
And he let me in and he was
like, [HUMMING] you know,
didn't say much, and very gruff.
And he gave me a
tour of his place.
And there were
passageways, but they
were sort of curved around.
And the stuff piled high.
It was about eight feet
high, with bungee cords
so it wouldn't cave in.
And he had polio as a
kid, so he had leg braces.
And he had to manage himself
through those corridors
with these braces.
And he slept on the
floor curled up.
And there was no sunlight and--
REGINA: That's sad.
Yeah.
I was thinking-- it was
the first time I thought,
how can I actually help him?
Because there was so much
stuff and he was so distant.
And we got the top floor and
he goes-- all of a sudden
he just opens up.
And these little tears
come in his eyes.
And he goes, I'm so embarrassed
to be living this way.
And I knew that
that was my way in.
REGINA: Yes.
So I was like, all right.
And I had a trash bag--
REGINA: He hadn't always
lived that way, though.
No.
REGINA: He'd had a trauma
of some kind in his life.
He had gotten
fired when you could
fire people for being older.
-Right.
It was like, he was fired and
he was-- get out of the office
today and he just gave up.
For about 10 years he just
started barricading himself
in his house.
And he literally
didn't-- I mean,
he told me he put a shotgun
in his mouth every night.
And he tried to pull the trigger
because it was so painful.
But he could never
pull the trigger.
So, that's how much
pain he was in.
REGINA: I mean, this
is really extreme.
And you did ultimately--
it took time.
You had to do it in baby steps.
BROOKS: Yeah, everyday.
I was there for
about five months.
REGINA: And you were
able to help him?
Yeah.
REGINA: What happened?
How did he feel in the end?
He was so jubilant.
And also, I had no judgment
about his situation.
So, as soon as he said,
I'm really embarrassed
to live this way, I had
a bag and I picked up
an empty Diet Coke liter, and I
said, do you need this anymore?
No.
You know, a little bottle.
He goes, no, I guess
I don't need it.
And I put it in the bag and I
just went through each thing
like that.
And he started
thinking that way.
And that's what it takes.
It's like, all right, I've
spilled soup on the floor.
I need to clean it up.
It's kind of that
matter-of-factness.
You know?
Cluttered stuff spills
throughout the house.
You work on a little at a time.
So it's not overwhelming.
REGINA: And he was willing to go
through that process with you.
And this is something--
when we feel that we are
overwhelmed by our stuff, it's
overwhelming to even think
of tackling it.
It's easier just to shut the
door on it, close the closet
or whatever, and
not deal with it.
Which causes a different
kind of anxiety.
There is anxiety
that's constantly
running in the back of your
life, then, isn't there?
That's why I started the
book out with his story.
Because, on some level,
everybody's situation
is like that.
It's too much.
We're overwhelmed.
And we give up.
And maybe, for us, overwhelmed
is the garage-- there's
too much stuff in the garage.
Or our desk is too cluttered.
You know, everybody's
got a threshold.
REGINA: Everybody
has their-- and even
if they're a tidy freak, it
can't be tidy enough sometimes.
I mean, sometimes
you're going crazy
if there are two
papers on your desk
that are not lined up properly.
And that's another kind
of obsessive behavior--
obsessive compulsive.
It does happen.
Yeah, places that
look really neat
can have just as much
clutter as the guy's house
that I told the story about.
Because just because it's
nicely stacked doesn't mean
it's part of your life.
REGINA: Because we're
talking about, again,
relationship to your stuff and.
And, you know, the kind
of house that this man--
I went through-- I ended up
in a home like that one time.
I had to use the bathroom.
And it was at place
out on a farm.
And I was riding their
horses and I asked
if I could use the bathroom.
And, so, they
hesitantly let me in.
And I thought, well
they must not trust me.
And then I realized why
as soon as I went in.
It was just like that.
There were little pathways
and there were Coke cans
and there was wax paper,
old sandwich wrappers.
And there was a little child--
it appeared to be grandparents
raising their grandchild.
And there was this
little child, so tiny,
wandering through all of this.
And that was their life.
And that brings me to this
whole thing about children.
I mean, we start these
patterns early in life.
Just looking at some of
the gross amount of gifts,
for example, that we give our
kids on birthdays and holidays.
The cycle-- let's
talk about childhood
and where this cycle
begins for many of us.
Well, you learn a
lot from your parents.
You see your parents
gathering stuff into the home.
And people, when
they buy stuff--
bring stuff in-- they're
always jubilant and happy.
And there's something
good about it for them.
REGINA: Everybody's happy.
Yeah.
And, so, they start to see--
and the stuff doesn't leave.
It comes in, and if it's trash--
if it's, like, old food or, you
now something that's papers that
are torn, you threw them out.
But a lot of stuff just
comes in and stays in.
So kids learn how to
acquire but not to let go.
And you just start to
see, I need things.
I must need things to be happy.
I must need stuff.
And people talk about stuff
with a certain excitement.
Or kids see commercials.
You know, they learn
from commercials.
REGINA: Yeah, if you get
your Little Pony toy,
you're going to be really cute
with your little blonde pony
tail, hopping down the
street with little sparkles
around you.
[LAUGHING] An exciting
life, a fairytale life.
--spend millions of
dollars on advertising
and your friends will really
like you if you have this toy.
Which is the same
thing they tell adults.
So, you're really getting into
this whole acceptance thing.
That we feel we have to
have this stuff in order
to be accepted.
And little kids are particularly
susceptible to that.
Any kid that watches
television-- it
always makes me kind of sad when
I see little kids at a birthday
party maybe a four-year-old
or three-year-old
with piles of gifts
in front of them--
or during other holidays.
And they just start
tearing through it
and throwing it aside
and it's like being a kid
in a candy shop, literally.
Not even acknowledging one
thing because their attention
is already drawn to the next
shiny ribbon and package.
And you end up with all this
stuff that, a lot of times,
is never even utilized.
It's just tucked away
into little boxes, bins,
and into their closets.
So, that's a beginning
point for all of us on that.
BROOKS: Yeah.
I encourage people to limit
the amount of presents.
It's a kind thing
to do to your kid.
I mean, usually you
think kindness is just
giving them a lot of stuff.
But it's nice to teach them,
here are two or three things.
We really thought you'd love.
Yeah, and paying attention
to what it is they're
really resonating with, what
they can use and interact with,
maybe on a creativity scale.
But this whole story of stuff--
there's a really good video
on YouTube called
The Story of Stuff
and I would encourage
anybody to look at it.
But someone else did
their own story of stuff.
And we're going to roll
the tape in just a second.
It was one of our favorites.
George Carlin did a little
video on stuff that some of you
may have seen before.
But it's worth taking
a look at again.
So, let's take look at
George Carlin and Stuff.
GEORGE CARLIN: I would have been
out here a little bit sooner,
but they gave me the
wrong dressing room.
And I couldn't find any
place to put my stuff.
And I don't know
how you are, but I
need a place to put my stuff.
So--
[APPLAUSE]
--that's what I've
been doing back there.
Just trying to to find
a place for my stuff.
You know how important that is.
That's the whole-- that's
the whole meaning of life,
isn't it?
Trying to find the
place for your stuff.
[LAUGHTER]
That's all your house is.
Your house is just a
place for your stuff.
If you didn't have
so much good stuff,
you wouldn't need a house.
[LAUGHTER]
You could just walk
around all the time.
That's all your house is.
It's a pile of stuff
with a cover on it.
You see that when you take off
an airplane and you look down
and you see everybody's
got a little pile of stuff.
Everybody's got their
own pile of stuff.
And when you leave your
stuff, you gotta lock it up.
Wouldn't want somebody to come
by and take some of your stuff.
They always take the good stuff.
[LAUGHTER]
They don't bother with
that crap you're saving.
Ain't nobody interested in your
fourth grade arithmetic papers.
They're looking
for the good stuff.
That's all your house is.
It's a place to keep
yourself while you go out
and get more stuff.
[LAUGHTER]
Now, sometimes-- sometimes,
you've got to move.
You got to get a bigger house.
Why?
Too much stuff.
You've got to move
all your stuff.
And maybe put some of
your stuff in storage.
Imagine that, there's a whole
industry based on keeping
an eye on your stuff.
Enough about your
stuff, let's talk
about other people's stuff.
Did you ever notice when you
go to somebody else's house,
you never quite feel a
hundred percent at home.
You know why?
No room for your stuff.
Somebody else's stuff
is all over the place.
And what awful stuff it is.
[LAUGHTER]
Where did they get this stuff?
And if you have to stay
overnight at someone's house,
you know, unexpectedly,
and they give
you a little room to sleep in
that they don't use that often.
Someone died in it 11 years ago.
And they haven't moved
any of his stuff!
[LAUGHTER]
Or wherever they
give you to sleep,
usually right near the
bed there's a dresser
and there's never any room on
the dresser for your stuff.
Someone else's shit
is on the dresser.
Have you noticed
that their stuff
is sh*t and your sh*t is stuff!
[LAUGHTER]
[APPLAUSE]
Now, sometimes, you go on
vacatioN-- you got to bring
some of your stuff with you.
You can't bring all your stuff,
just the stuff you really like.
The stuff that fits
you well that month.
Let's say you're
gonna go to Honolulu.
You're gonna go all
the way to Honolulu.
You've got to take
two big bags of stuff.
Plus your carry-on stuff, plus
the stuff in your pockets.
You get all the way to Honolulu
and you get in your hotel room
and you start to
put away your stuff.
That's the first thing
you do in a hotel
room is put away your stuff.
I'll put some stuff in here,
put some stuff down there.
Here's another
place, stuff here.
I'll put some stuff over there.
You put your stuff
over there, I'm
putting my stuff over there.
Here's another place
for some stuff--
[LAUGHTER]
We got more places
than we've got stuff!
We're gonna have
to buy more stuff!
[APPLAUSE]
REGINA: [CHUCKLING] I
think he said it perfectly.
And I think most
people can relate
to certain portions of that.
And, I mean, even the part
that he was talking about,
staying at other
people's houses.
You stay in a bedroom and you
got a little dresser and all
their stuff is on there.
I have a hard time with that.
Because I don't want to be
surrounded with other people's
stuff.
And this is the thing.
When you come into personal
relationships between people,
this is where it starts
getting really dicey.
Say intimate
relationships, you're
going to try to cohabit now.
And this really becomes the
source of a lot of discord.
I mean, I think we
can all remember
that when we met our
significant other a you think,
you really want to
bring that wagon
wheel coffee table into
the living room [LAUGHING]
and whatnot.
So, how do you deal with that?
We talked a little
bit about that couple.
But this is-- say we're
not at each other.
We're all newly in love.
We want to move in together.
But we're having
issues about our stuff.
Well, I think it's good to sit
down and talk about-- when you
first moved in, I would
suggest recognizing
that that other person
cares about those things
they're bringing in.
And if anything is
said disparaging
about any of those
things, the person's
going to take it personally.
Because we relate to our stuff.
We feel like it's
an extension of us.
And also, too, there's
a sense of wanting
to control someone when
you tell them-- when you
try to make them do something.
And people I hate
to be controlled.
We feel like an object.
We're no longer a person.
We're being manipulated around.
And control can also be a way of
clutter, controlling somebody.
Because it cuts
off the connection
from the other person.
REGINA: So you're
saying clutter is
anything that's standing in
the way of life, of connection?
Yeah, well, my experience
is that connection
is one of the best feelings
that we could possibly have.
And a lot of ads show
things as, if you get this,
you'll be connected to your mom,
to your friends, to whatever.
Because they recognize
how powerful it is.
Things will never
give us connection.
People do.
Activities that
we really love do.
You know, so, it's
important to recognize,
this relationship
is a powerful thing.
And we like this connection.
So, as we talk
about these things,
as they come into the house--
or a couple that's been together
for a long while,
you want to consider
the relationship first.
And as you question things, does
this support the relationship?
Or does what I have to say
about the other person's things
support the relationship?
To leave yourself open
and be kind, you know?
REGINA: A little sensitivity
training is in order.
I mean, that's
really-- just that one
piece of advice there: don't
make disparaging comments.
BROOKS: Can I tell
one quick story?
Yes, absolutely.
I had this couple-- she
had all these shopping
bags, very shiny, Neiman
Marcus kind of bags.
Saving them?
Yeah, she had over a hundred.
And he was like-- the husband--
oh my god, I can't believe
she she has all these bags.
He was saying that to me.
And then he would tear into her,
you don't need all those bags!
Seriously, you don't
need those bags.
Can you just get rid of them?
And she was shrinking.
And it was hard
on her, you know?
She was in pain because she
was connected to those things.
She didn't want to
let them go and he
just was not helping her.
So I said to him, I said,
could you just stop talking?
You know?
And I said to her,
how many of these bags
do you think you need?
I really wanted to know.
I was curious.
And she said, I never
thought about that.
Maybe, like, five.
I said, all right,
let's pick the five.
So she did.
We threw out the rest.
And her husband's mouth
was like a cartoon.
The jaw dropped.
REGINA: [LAUGHING]
It dropped open.
And I said, this is the best way
for you to talk with your wife.
Help her.
Because we're so used to pushing
people to try to motivate them,
again, to try to control them.
And that backfires on us
because the connection's cut.
So how can we be open with that
other person and help them.
And then we help
ourselves by doing that
because a relationship blossoms.
The communication flows.
REGINA: Yes.
And, see, we forget that it is
a relationship with stuff, which
we've talked about already.
But we are very careless
in our words with others
because we think, oh
come on, it's just stuff.
And you're not stopping
to think about all
of the emotions
that are attached
to these things, these
things in everyone's lives.
And as George Carlin
was saying, we
have houses so we can
store all this stuff
and protect all this stuff.
And so I think I can see where
I've been insensitive in, well,
either defending my own
stuff or about someone
else's stuff on occasion.
Because I'm thinking, oh
it's not life or death,
it's just stuff.
BROOKS: Yeah.
But that's not true.
That's not how it ends up.
It can end up in really quite
a conflict if you let it go.
And there are some
other nuances we
want to talk about because we're
going to take a little break.
We need to talk about
things like divorce.
When your excellence
wants to store
their stuff at your house.
About things like
inheritance, what
happens when you
inherit all this stuff
that was precious to others?
And much more, so
we'll be right back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
OK, now we get into
the really touchy
stuff: divorce, inheritance,
and much more-- gifts.
And I'm imagining
every person listening
to this has had some kind of
stress over these situations,
if not all of them.
So, let's start with divorce.
Now, your relationships has
gotten out of control, maybe
over your stuff, who knows.
But it is disintegrated
to the point
where you're going
to now call it quits.
And now you have to part.
And I think a lot
of our viewers have
probably been through this.
This is difficult on
many levels, obviously.
But let's look at it from the
attachment to the things we've
accumulated together and even
extended into what happens when
one person is maybe
downsizing and going away
to a little apartment
and the other person's
keeping the house and now they
want to keep their stuff there.
Right, so, first off, it helps
to admit that there's pain,
that there's a lot of pain
because this connection had
to be severed.
And there may be
arguments over things
that are more about the
pain rather than the stuff.
REGINA: Right.
It's going to color everything.
REGINA: Making a power
play and using an item
that maybe both of you
value as a sticking
point there, a win-lose.
Yeah.
And pain, when it's infused in
our body in a way like that,
we don't even notice it.
Because it's a constant.
And, so, we can take it
out on the other person.
Or it can get about the stuff
and it's really about the pain.
And I had a client
who, half of her garage
was filled with her
ex-husband's stuff.
And they had been
divorced for two years.
He'd been living
in his own place.
And I asked about
it and she said,
well, he has a really
small apartment,
so he can't have
all these things.
So I'm just letting him
keep his stuff here.
And she shrank when she talked
about it you could feel like--
REGINA: She was deflated.
You know?
I said well how does
it feel-- actually,
I pointed out how she shrank.
I said, I have this
feeling every time
you drive into your
driveway, you're
just reminded of the divorcee.
Because it was tall,
quite a tall stack.
And it's like this
monster of her pain
just leaping on her
every time she comes in.
Yeah, in the garage.
And she goes into her
house with that feeling
and it's hard on her.
And then she told me
that, because she asked
for the divorce, that
she felt that she
would hurt him more by telling
him his stuff has to go.
So, I said, I don't
think it helps him
for you to take
one for the team,
so to speak, or
to take a bullet.
And I said it's important for
you to take care of yourself.
And-- she had a daughter--
I said, otherwise,
you're teaching your daughter
that it's OK be hurt,
to knowingly be hurt.
And she got it.
And she called him up.
And she said, look, I
have to have you come
and start getting these things.
And he argued about it
and I said, stay strong.
Probably tried to lay a
little guilt trip on her:
hey, you're the one that
wanted me out of here.
Yeah, these common dilemmas.
Yeah, and she said
no, and I need you to.
So they worked it out that
he would come once a week
and get things and
bring them back.
And so, she felt
better by doing that.
Because that worked for
him and it worked for her.
And there was a relief
in her by doing that.
That's the relief that comes
from getting rid of clutter.
In any situation, clutter is so
restrictive and hurtful on us.
And we get used to that.
And we don't notice it anymore.
But as we start to
let go, we start
to feel the relief right away.
And, so, that's
what she noticed.
REGINA: Yeah, that makes sense.
Just start clearing
the relationship
and clearing the guilt
and clearing the clutter
all at the same time
because it is all all
attached to one another.
And, now let's talk about
something that is, I think,
very difficult for people.
And that's the subject
of inherited items
that your grandmother, great
grandmother, mother, father
may have found very
precious to them.
But it has no-- you have no
connection with those things.
You didn't accumulate
those things.
Well, what happens-- or what
I think my experience is,
is that oftentimes people
hang on to inheritance stuff
that they don't care about.
And I know they don't care
about it because I'll say,
this table here, do
you like it or not?
No, I don't.
Can we let go of it?
No, I can't.
Why?
Well, I inherited it
from my grandmother
and I think I should keep it.
So they don't like it.
But they feel because it's an
inheritance-- and, so, what
ends up happening
is, people start--
it's really hard when someone
dies that you're close to.
And there's sorrow.
And, so, to get
rid of their stuff
feels like you're getting rid
of them even more, like finally.
There's this reminder
that this is from grandma.
But it's not grandma.
But it feels life if I let
this go, I'm letting them go.
So, again, I'm going
to hang onto this pain,
because it is painful.
Because this reminds
you of your grandmother.
At the same time, it makes
you angry at your grandmother,
that she gave you something
that you don't like.
But you have to hang onto it.
So, it's a love and
anger at the same time.
REGINA: Well, in
addition, you see people,
when it comes down to
the time of inheritance,
you see siblings, for
example, when a parent dies,
starting to fight and argue
over make a power play and grab
for all this stuff
that none of them
necessarily even want
a lot of the stuff.
What's up with that?
BROOKS: Well, again,
there's this feeling of,
this person's gone that
was a big part of them.
And it's like trying to
grab a piece of that person.
And that could be
the underlying thing.
What's going on.
And it's hard when
people are in that place
because they're emotionally
disconnected from each other.
So, they can't go, I'm
really missing my father.
REGINA: This is
about missing Dad.
This isn't about his stuff.
But in reality, is it healthy,
in a lot of cases, for a person
to say, you know, that's
a picture of dad when we
were fishing together as kids.
And that's how I remembered him.
And, gee, I'd love to
have his tackle box.
Is that a healthy
way of holding on--
if you're going to say
holding on to something,
or taking responsible
inheritance, so to speak?
BROOKS: Yeah, if it
feels good to you.
Again, it's your decision.
And I think what it
comes down to is,
how does it make you feel?
Like the tackle box, I would
say to somebody, how does
the tackle box make you feel.
I love it.
I love-- I'm going to
leave it out on the table
so that every time I walk
by it reminds me-- you know,
you don't want to put in
a box or storage locker.
Because then it's not
part of your life.
REGINA: So, it really comes
down to that relationship again
and how it makes you.
And we're going to get
into the dynamics of that.
Let's talk about gifts.
That's a really difficult one.
People scramble,
saying, oh my god,
they gave me those earrings.
I better put them on before
they come over to the house,
that kind of thing.
Again, where you're
operating out of guilt
and you're running
around trying to please
everyone because someone
has given you some stuff.
BROOKS: It's amazing,
the clutter of gifts.
It just amazed me when I
first started doing my job.
And I would say, what about
this glass, do you like it?
No.
Can we let it go?
I can't.
Why?
Well, my uncle gave it to
me and what if he comes over
and wants to see it.
You know?
Where's the glass?
And then he's going
to get-- he's going
to be angry at that person.
So, people would
hang on to stuff
that they don't like to
try to manage somebody
else's possible experience.
And it's hard to live that way.
And, again, here's this person
you're trying to please.
And there's a part of you that's
angry that you've got something
in your house that you don't
like because they gave it to
and they put you
in this situation.
REGINA: Right, so
you're a slave to it.
I love it when people have
birthday parties and say,
just bring yourself.
Or make a nice little
dish to share with others.
And, that, I find it such a
relief when you know you're not
scrambling to try to figure out
what does this person-- what
could they possibly want?
They don't need anything.
Because, by this time, most of
us don't need anything in life.
We're not college kids.
Well, you can give
somebody an experiencing,
take them to a concert
or a restaurant.
But, these gift things--
it is OK to go, all right,
I'm going to let it go.
And if the persos-- the
odd chance of person
asked about it: where's
that glass I gave you?
REGINA: Well, most
people would be
too embarrassed to ask anyway.
-Yeah.
No one is going to ask.
But if they did, you
could tell yourself,
I decided it wasn't
for me anymore.
I really appreciate you gave
it to me for my birthday.
But I donated need it so
somebody else could use it.
REGINA: That's a
nice way to do it.
That's a nice way to say--
that's politically very good.
And it's from the heart.
I mean, when you just
said that I thought,
well, that's really sweet.
That's really
considerate to make
sure that the item continues
having some usefulness
somewhere.
BROOKS: Yeah, and then
you take care of yourself,
which is the main thing of
clutter busting-- what serves
you, and removing what doesn't.
And it's a healthier
way to live.
And then you're much
more open to the world
and to other people.
REGINA: Yeah, when you hear
people that do go through
and say, I just
cleaned my closet
and gave my clothes
away, there's
always this kind of
lightness of being
about them when they do it.
But when you're
faced with having
to take that task on
initially, it's like, I
don't even want to go there.
I wouldn't even
know where to begin.
BROOKS: Yeah, I always thought
it was funny that the feeling
that people want
from their stuff,
they often get that feeling as
they're letting the clutter go.
REGINA: [LAUGHING] Exactly,
that's the irony is they're
letting go of that stuff.
Because they get
a sense of freedom.
And they get the thing.
And, like I said, it's exciting
when you get something.
But as human beings, we
adapt really quickly.
It's in our nature.
It's been around us
since caveman times.
We have to adapt quickly.
So, anything that's
new assimilates.
And, so, the newness wears off.
So--
Well, then let's
talk about where
the newness doesn't wear off.
Let's talk about collections.
BROOKS: Okay.
I always find it
interesting-- I
used to giggle when I
saw these billboards
for these guns and dolls shows.
And I was trying to get my
mind around the couple going in
and-- I understand it.
So, the guy's buying
his guns and the woman
is buying more of her dolls.
And the guy hates
the woman's dolls.
She hates his guns.
And, so, let's talk about it.
But you're justifying it
because this is not garbage.
This is a collection.
That's our justification.
It's a collection.
Now, what does that do in terms
of holding the other person
hostage and yourself.
Well, first off, it's hard
to tell somebody that's not
open to hearing about a
suggestion about their stuff,
to tell them something
about their stuff.
Because there's no
openness to receive it.
And, oftentimes,
people will tell
somebody, why do you have that?
I don't understand why
you keep these things.
And that person takes
it very personally.
They relate to these things.
It's like saying
something bad about them.
REGINA: But yet, your
collection may be infringing
upon your space to the point
where your collection is
taking over your living space.
I've seen that.
So, you're talking
about the person who
has to live with that stuff?
Yeah.
I had these clients--
they're in the book--
where the guy asked me, he says,
is it OK to have collections?
I said, yeah, well, what
are you talking about.
He goes, I have these
fishing bobbers.
The things that sit on top
of the water so the line
goes off that.
And I said, OK.
He goes, I have over 1,500.
And I go, OK, great.
Because, right away I'm
not going to be judgmental.
I just want to see
how he feels about it.
But his wife is sitting
there like this.
Like fuming, you know?
REGINA: [LAUGHING]
She hates his bobbers.
Yeah.
I go, you don't
like them do you?
She goes, I hate
that he has those.
She goes, when he's not looking,
I throw some of them out.
Oh, she said that
in from of him?
Yeah.
And I tell him all the time, why
do you have all those bobbers?
And he goes, but I like them.
So he liked them.
But she didn't.
And they were arguing--
they start arguing
about it back and forth.
And they were saying some pretty
mean things to each other.
And I said, how long have
you been arguing about this?
Like, how many years?
They said like 15 years.
So I said, so you want her to
stop telling you-- you want her
to like that you have these.
And I said to her, you
want him to hear you
and can get rid of these things.
And neither of you is changing.
But the relationship
is suffering.
Because when you talk to
somebody that harshly,
relationship takes a hit.
It's hard on the
relationship to be--
because we're open
to the other person
and those words go right in.
Like bullets.
Little poison darts.
Yeah.
So, I said, the
relationship is a thing too.
And I need for you
to both-- I mean,
I think it'll help
you both to see that.
And, tonight when you go
to bed, or when you wake up
in the morning,
say how can we deal
with this differently
in a way that
makes us be open to each other?
It puts the relationship
before the bobs,
and the resistance to the bobs.
So what happened
to them ultimately?
I don't know.
Because I worked with
them up to that point--
Oh, up to that point.
And then it's bye,
so you don't know
if they're still arguing all
these years later about that.
No, I left it in their court.
But I was very matter
of fact with them.
Because it's important to
eliminate what the clutter is.
The clutter wasn't the bobbers.
I mean, on some level it was
for her, but not for him.
But for the
relationship, the way
they approached it was
clutter to the relationship.
So, if they could be
more open about it,
maybe she goes, I
hate that you do this,
it's really hard on me.
And he goes, hey, I hate
when you tell me that.
And at least they're coming
from an honest place.
And then maybe
something could happen.
Maybe he goes, all right,
well, maybe I could have 500.
And she goes, maybe I could stop
telling you to not have any.
You know?
REGINA: Yeah.
And find a compromise
ground because, again, it's
talking about relationship
with each other
before relationship
with stuff, ideally.
But there are people
who use their stuff
passive aggressively to
hold others hostage too.
Like a big, you
know-- to you on that.
I'm not getting rid of it.
Because they're
trying to do a power
play because of some other
kind of pain going on.
BROOKS: And, again, that happens
because they're in so much
pain, they can't see clearly.
And it feels like it's
going to make a difference.
But it's more like a bomb.
It's like dropping a bomb on a
country to get them to change.
And that doesn't
really work that well.
REGINA: There's another one
you talk about in the book.
And that is about people
bringing their work
into your personal space.
I know I have this problem
because I do a lot of research.
I have the books stacked
up by the bed sometimes.
First thing in the
morning, my mind
is onto whatever it is
that I'm researching,
the last thing at night.
And it drives Scott, my
husband, absolutely crazy.
He's like, I want to
ease into the day,
I want to ease out of the day.
And I'm [MAKES BUZZING SOUND],
you know?
All around it.
And you have a
couple that you talk
about in the book
where both of them
have their work stacked
all around them.
Yeah, was that by
their bed stands?
Yes.
Yeah.
And I helped them dismantle
their bedside tables.
And I told them, I said,
it's really hard-- first off,
it's hard to sleep with
all that next to you.
Because you take that with
you when you go to sleep.
And--
REGINA: Truely.
--yeah, and were
sold on distractions.
We're sold on having a TV in our
bedroom and then to have books
by our bed and to just have
things that we constantly
are interacting with.
But then they distract
us from-- like,
they were distracted
in their relationship
from all all the
stuff by their bed.
And the thing is--
REGINA: What happened
when they got rid of it?
There was just this--
their hearts open up.
People's hearts literally--
you can see it in their faces
and their bodies.
And then they start reacting
to each other differently.
So--
REGINA: So, the connection
can come back between them.
Yeah, and the
interesting thing is,
we tend to go for distractions
when we're missing something
really primal in our life.
So, they were missing
their connection.
And it's natural.
Over time, you get
used to someone.
You get used to another person.
And then you start to
take them for granted.
move away from them.
But then your connection
starts to leave you.
And then you start
feeling badly.
So, you bring stuff into
your life to try to fix
those little holes, you know?
REGINA: Yes, yes.
But then, those things add to
the cutoff in the connection.
So, at some point,
hopefully you can go,
the connection
between us matters
more than all this stuff.
REGINA: So, that's really
primo in this conversation,
is recognizing that if
we've lost our way on that,
that's where we have to begin.
We have to go back to center.
Is this relationship
between us important?
And if it is, then you have to
start looking at how you can
functionally deal with all these
ancillary issues of your stuff?
And, now, let's talk about
the actual technical part.
Because that's where you started
this whole journey of clearing.
BROOKS: Sure.
So, we say, OK, I get
that I need to start
clearing some stuff out.
But I feel overwhelmed.
Now, maybe, you've
procrastinated.
You've put it off for months.
Maybe you've even
procrastinated for years.
And the day has come to do this.
How do you take that feeling
of overwhelm away from someone?
You lift it from
them, that burden?
BROOKS: You mean when I'm
working with them or--
REGINA: Yeah.
Well, first off, I take
a tour of their house.
And, like I said,
they're usually
very uncomfortable and anxious.
They're worried about
how I'm judging them.
And they're not used to having
somebody over and seeing
their place uncovered.
But, since I don't have any--
I'm not making bad comments--
and, usually, I try to
look for good things.
Like I look for things about
the way their house looks,
or compliment them, you know?
Or compliment them.
REGINA: So you set them
at ease, but they still
have to get rid of their stuff.
So, how does that process?
So I tend to find-- I look
for the place that makes them
the most uncomfortable,
the place
they don't want to start in.
And I--
REGINA: And you make
them go there first?
Yeah, I'll just say
really matter of factly,
let's just start here.
And I'll sit on the
floor with them.
And they're cautious.
But I'm very curious.
And that curiosity helps.
So I have trash
bags, one for trash
and one for recycling
and one for charity.
REGINA: You come armed
with your trash bags.
Yeah.
And I just go and pick
up the first thing.
Because, what happens is
they're seen everything.
That's why they're overwhelmed.
They see everything.
Even if they're not seeing
it, they're aware of it.
And, so, they're not capable
of making any decisions.
So I'll just hand
them one thing.
I'll say-- have them
hold it-- I'll go,
do you like this or
can we let it go?
Very matter of fact.
Um, yeah I like that.
I use it.
Great.
But another thing is, well,
I don't really care for that.
All right, let's let it go.
Keep it very simple.
REGINA: It really helps
to have a third party
or a second party there to
just say, OK, there it goes.
It's gone.
Yeah.
Because otherwise, you're
going to the maybe piles.
BROOKS: Right, and, can
I put this in maybe?
I love that.
What?
Maybe?
But maybe, maybe means no.
It's like, it's a way of
delaying getting to know.
Cause if you love something--
like do you love your jacket?
I like this jacket, yeah.
I wouldn't say I love it.
But I like it.
I had it made just for me.
Yeah.
-And it feels good on you?
-Yeah, feels good.
Serves the job.
Yeah.
Great, so it feels good.
So then, you like it?
REGINA: Yeah.
So, you didn't go into
a lot of explanation
about why you should keep it.
Oh, I spent a lot of
money, or whatever.
So, it's the simple
yeses that are things
that are a part of our life.
And if we have a lot of
words-- you know, oh,
I need this because
what if I need--
I don't need it but what if I--
REGINA: So, then it's a
mental rationalization.
It's not really,
organically from the heart.
Yeah.
It's like, I don't need
it, but what if I need it?
You know.
So, we really-- this is
the hard part, for women:
shoes, purses, clothing.
I mean, I'm sure
men have equivalent
with old sporting equipment
and that kind of thing.
But for most of the women
I know, this is a problem.
BROOKS: Yeah.
Well, it's interesting.
I was working with a
client not too long ago.
And she had quite a
lot of pairs of shoes.
And--
REGINA: Someone else has
a lot of shoes. [LAUGHING]
And I said to her, I said,
well, let's go through them.
And I handed her
one pair at a time.
And she was like, you know,
um, I can't get rid of those.
But she made this face,
like something was up.
I said, well what
was that about?
And she said, well,
they look really good
but they hurt my feet.
So I wear them for
certain events.
I said, Yeah but they
hurt your feet, right?
She goes, Yeah, but
I have to wear them.
So, I said, whenever
we do something
that knowingly hurts us,
and we try to justify it,
it's really hard.
It's a real big blow.
It's like saying, it's
OK for me to be hurt.
REGINA: Right, that's
insulting ourselves, really.
Yeah.
And it's like--
and I understand.
People tell us that
it's OK live that way.
Other people live that way.
But you're saying no.
If it causes pain--
If it hurts you, let it go.
if it causes pain
emotionally, if you--
I know you also
wrote in the book,
if it creates a lack of energy.
If you look at it and
your energy deflates,
listen to your
energy and your heart
before the rationalizations
of the mind.
On everything, right?
Yeah.
Well, you're checking in with
that, that immediate feeling.
And you could listen
to your mind too.
But you want to just
beware of the-- all the, I
but I might need it for this,
or so and so gave this to me.
Or it cost a lot of money.
Or I need it for this, but
I don't really like it.
REGINA: So, have you
been through this process
where people have been
particularly brave
and you've gone through
this and you just
insisted and they've hung
with you and been diligent
and ended up getting rid of
maybe 3/4 of all their stuff?
BROOKS: Yeah, easily.
-Easily?
Yeah, I usually
assume 60 to 70 percent
of the person's-- their
things are clutter.
Not that they're bad or that
they're a waste, or whatever.
It's just that they
aren't part of their life.
And there's something
about things
that aren't part of our
life that create a stagnant.
Or things that we don't like
that we hang onto because,
however we justify,
it hurts-- it
literally creates pain
and suffering in our body
and in our mind.
REGINA: Absolutely.
And I see that because I see it
in people's faces repeatedly.
When they want to hang onto
something and it's hurting them
but they're justifying why
they need to hang onto it.
You can see the
discomfort in them.
The thing is, I never say,
you've got to get rid of this.
I point out the discomfort so
they realize, oh my god, yeah,
it is really uncomfortable.
Because we sometimes miss that.
And when if you're
working by yourself,
you can try to notice that
discomfort in your body.
REGINA: So, when you talk about
these people that have gotten
rid of easily 3/4
of their stuff,
brave souls that have gotten
rid of their stuff-- what
do you see as transformation
in their lives?
I mean, is it 100
percent transformative?
BROOKS: Well, the transformation
happens the instant
they start to let things go.
Meaning they start to
feel better right away.
It's like, they let go
of three or four items
and you can see they
start to-- their color
comes back to their face.
They seem brighter.
Their voice seems stronger.
And I'll ask them, I'll say,
this space that you created,
how does it feel?
And they'll go,
what do you mean?
And I'll say, how does this
feel, this space right here?
And they go, well,
it's actually nice.
It's kind of hard for
us to notice open space.
But open space really,
it's so good for us.
It doesn't mean that
we have nothing.
But it's important
to have space.
It's nursing for us.
And I'll ask them
how they're feeling
as they're letting things go.
And they'll say, you
know, I'm feeling better.
So the transformation
is instant.
REGINA: What about in
working spaces, where you're
working within an organization?
And there's a kind of mass
psyche to the organization,
right?
And what happens when
the organization just
feels cluttered?
BROOKS: Well, you lose
communication between people.
Because communication--
connection between people
always suffers with clutter.
People don't think very clearly.
They tend to think
more about the past.
Because clutter seems
to infiltrate our minds
in a nostalgic kind of way.
But it takes away a lot
of the present moment.
So, it's a lot of old decisions.
It doesn't keep us
current in our thinking.
REGINA: So, not good
for a work environment?
BROOKS: No, for business.
Yeah, yeah.
And I've clutter busted
businesses and gone in,
and people, again,
have gotten rid
of 70, 80 percent of the
stuff that wasn't serving
the business, that
they had never
even thought about
because they've
never questioned it that way.
Usually the new stuff
is always coming in.
Deal with the new stuff.
But the old stuff sitting there
interferes with the new stuff.
And the new stuff suffers.
So it's worth taking that time.
Because what's current
will think you.
And, so, again, transformation.
Always transformations.
Profitability even
goes up when clutter
is busted in organizations.
BROOKS: I imagine it would.
Yeah, you would think so.
So, we only have a
minute or so left.
So, just really briefly, with
the downturn in the economy
and with people downsizing
do you see an upside
in all of this for us?
To have to start breaking
our addiction to our stuff?
Yeah.
It makes us more aware of
the things in our life.
I mean, whenever there's
a kind of restriction,
then we tend to assess
more of what's going on.
And it's a natural
taking-care-of-ourselves
thing that comes in.
And so, we start to look around.
And-- which is maybe something
we haven't done before.
And now we have to do
it, and now we have to get
down to what really matters.
And on that note,
before we say goodbye,
I wanted to offer you
a souvenir if you'd
like to take a [LAUGHING]
Because I kept talking
about the glass, right?
Actually, I'm just
taunting you with that.
You do not have to take
our Gaiam mug home.
No, I like it.
It's pretty.
-It is pretty.
-I love the symbol.
And the blue color's nice.
-There you go, OK.
Well, I just wanted to
put you on the spot.
Brooks, thank you so much.
It's certainly making me
think about how I can deal
a little more sensitively
with some of my own stuff
and how Scott and I might
do that together as well.
And I'm sure everybody's
gotten something out of this.
Oh, I'm glad.
You're welcome, Regina.
Thanks for having me on.
Thank you so much.
And I do, I hope
this has helped you
sort through some
of your own issues
surrounding your possessions.
Meanwhile, you can become
proactive by following some
of the many exercises
available in Brooks'
book, which is called
"Clutter Busting Your Life."
You can find it in all the
main booksellers, right?
Or online.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[MUSIC PLAYING]